from hanselminutes.com. It's Hanselman.
It's our weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number three Oh six.
Recorded live Tuesday, February 14th, 2012. Support
for Hansel minutes is provided
by Tellerik rad controls, the
most comprehensive suite of components
for windows forms and asp.net
web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this
episode, Scott talks with zoo
city author Lauren. BUCAs about
creating science fiction. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman and this
is another episode of Hansel
minutes and I'm here and
beautiful Wellington New Zealand at the
Webstock. And I have the
absolute pleasure of sitting down
with Lauren BUCAs, who is
the 2011 Arthur C. Clark winner for
her novel Zhou city. Also,
you wrote Moxie land. That's
right. And you've working on
another book right now. I'm
working on a book about
a time traveling serial killer
called the shining girls. That'll
be out in 2013. Oh,
that's brilliant. Okay. So we
have to talk about that
in time travel and both
folks who listened to the
podcast or read my blog,
know that I'm really into
science fiction and I've been
going through a scifi on
my Kindle at just a
ridiculous pace. I'm actually about
halfway through zoo city right
now, and I've fallen asleep
with a book on my
face, the digital book on
my face, a couple of
different times. I wanted to
talk to you about process
because I think that's interesting
too, to the listeners. And
it's always interesting to me
that we, as the non
science fiction writers have a
perspective about what it's like,
you know, I assume it's
this kind of amazing romantic
thing where you're like in
a cafe in a wonderful
foreign country, you live in
Cape town, South Africa, and the
words just kind of flow.
You know, you're typing on
like an old timey typewriter,
and then you rip off
the manuscript. You only have
one copy of, and you
turn it in. Basically I
sit at a hotel pool
and kind of lounge with
cocktails and kind of type
one handed. Well, you know,
looking fantastic in my bikini.
No, it's it's hell on
earth. It's, you know, it's
a, it sounds terrible. And
I know that there are
much more difficult occupations and
much more labor intensive occupations,
but it is very lonely
work. You're locked inside your
head all day making stuff
up. So I actually rent
a studio space so that
I can have other people
around and I'm not working
from home. And I spend
a lot of my time
avoiding writing, which is ridiculous
because it's a privilege to
get paid, to make up
stories. It's amazing, but there's
a lot of kind of
wasting time on the internet.
You'll see if you follow
me on Twitter that I
spend kind of the first
two hours of the day
messing around on the internet.
And then I kind of
go quiet. And that's when
I'm, I'm actually settling down
to work. And it's basically
up until the point that
I have to force myself
to do it, that I
can't avoid it anymore, that
I actually have to knuckle
down and actually do some
do work. Now, does it
feel like work? It does
feel like work. I think
it's because I've been doing
it as work for a,
you know, I've been a
professional writer in some capacity,
either as a journalist or
a TV script writer for
the last wow. Since 1997.
So, so putting words down
on paper is work and
it is also a joy
and it's tremendously exciting as
soon as I'm into it,
you know, within the first
20 minutes, I'm having a
fantastic time and that's wonderful,
but I will, I will
avoid getting there. And it's
quite a perverse and twisted
thing to do to yourself
to avoid doing something that
you love that you've always
wanted to do. I think
it's just human nature Is
that, I mean procrastination by
its nature. It's just what
we do. Yeah. Do you
do any take techniques to
like, like the Pomodoro technique
where you set a timer
and you're like, okay, I'm
going to sprint for 30
minutes and then give myself
a gift at the end
of it. I've been, I've
been doing more kind of,
of the Pomodoro sprinting stuff,
but mainly I use freedom
Mac freedom, which is fantastic.
It just locks you out
of the internet because I
don't always have that willpower,
but I am trying to
build in more reward systems.
And I think, you know,
the most important thing for
me is to not just
be locked in my head
a few years ago, I
got a grant from the
national arts council in South Africa
to write Marcy land, my
first novel. And I locked
myself in the house and
I wouldn't let myself out
of the house until I
had a thousand words down
on paper. And what happened
was that I just had
no stimulation and I just
kind of shut down. I
didn't know how to talk
to people anymore. And I
know that sounds overdramatic, but
I would go out and
I would struggle to initiate
chit chat. And it was
very frustrating and it was
very alienating and you absolutely
should not do that. So
that idea of the writer
who has become like so
involved in their own world
and their own, their own
minds, that they've lost the
ability to speak. It sounds
like classic writer, that's like
such a cliche, but you're
saying it actually does happen.
It definitely. It definitely happened
to me during that specific
period. So what I've learned
is that I need a
space where there are other
people around. I can still
retreat into my own world.
I put on my headphones,
I play my music and
that's fine, but I can
go make a cup of
coffee. I can turn around
and somebody can show me
a funny YouTube video and,
you know, just, just be
able to be in the
world and have people around.
The other thing is, you
know, I was a journalist
for a very long time
and being out in the
world, interviewing people, it's like
a backstage pass to society.
So you really get a
sense of what is happening
around you. And you're not
just stuck in your cozy
little enclave. And I think
that's really important. I think
it's really important for writers
to be social, to be
out in the world to
have experiences. And I'm not
saying you need to go
to the full Hunter S
Thompson route, but you need
to understand people. You need
to be an observer. How
often does going out into
the world and sitting at
a cafe or walking in
the mall, give you that
inspiration, that you then rush
back and like you see
someone wearing something or their
hair is a certain way,
or they do something, you
see an interaction. And then
that ends up in the
book. You know, I, I
file that stuff. I don't
run away and write it
down immediately. You know, I'm,
I'm absorbing stuff all the
time. I'm probably stealing bits
of your personality right now.
You'll see it rock up
five years from now. Yeah.
It's, it's not, it's not
an instant run home and
write it down. It's just
kind of observing constantly and
trying to find stuff. But
one of the things I
do like to do when
I'm writing a book is
to go on, on Iraqi,
you know, to go and
visit the locations. And I
find that that reality is,
is much richer than anything
you could make up. And
I think you can see
that novelists who do their
research, who've actually been to
places and you, can you
get such a sense of
where this is and that
they've actually been, then that
they have a real understanding
of this and that they're,
I think it's the surprising
details. And those little nuances,
I think, are really important
for me in my writing
process. How much of that
is absorption and versus how
much of it is. Note-taking
like, if you're going to
go to a township or
you're gonna go off into
the mountains, are you sitting
there with a sketchpad and
writing stuff down? Or do
you literally just let it
come in by osmosis and
hope that you'll remember it?
It's a bit of both.
If I'm, if I'm on
a Reiki, then I'm taking
notes obsessively. Tell me that
word again. Explain that Iraqi
reconnaissance mission. Oh, okay. Yeah.
Sorry. It's terrible. Militaristic term.
I thought it was some
kind of amazing South African
word. I didn't No, no.
I think it's me being
pretentious. The, the book that
you're working on now, you
said as a time travel
book, and I've been just
for some reason, devouring time
travel lately and all the
things that time travel books
have in common, I think
successful time travel books is
that they're hard. They ask
something of the list of
the, of the reader. They,
they, they assume that you're
not an idiot. Very few
other than maybe back to
the future. No, no time
travel story assumes that the
reader is an idiot and
they always make it one
level deeper than maybe it
would be right that way
you get to argue about
it. Like, no, no, no.
The wife came back and
then the people, and that
was in the same time
it was his grandfather or
whatever. Right. I'm sure that
when they were pitching like
the movie inception, they were
like, this is way too
complicated. And they're like, no,
no trust the audience that
they're smart. Right. When you're
doing that, though, that means
that I'm having to thank
you as the author to
make it self-consistent must be
doing a lot of work.
Where are you keeping all
of this straight? Is it
Vizio diagrams? Are you drawing
on the wall and marker.
I've got a lot of
notes in the novel and
I don't want to talk
too much about it because
I'm vaguely superstitious that not
another GenX has it, but
that it takes away the
energy. Well, let's talk about
the general concept of time
travel books that you've maybe,
Well, no. So what I
do with, with my research
and with keeping my timelines
in track is I have
three different timelines. You know,
it's about time traveling, serial
killers. So I've got his
timeline, which is out of
order. There is the actual
historical timeline, and then there's
the book's timeline. And I
have three different timelines up
on my wall with different
note cards. And I've got
very information on there. He
leaves anachronistic clues on the
body. So I've got to
also track which clue has
gone, where at one point
he's injured, I've got to
make sure that he's injured
in the correct scenes. So
it's, it's a hell of
a thing. And it is,
it's this very visual map
that I've gotten kind of
scrolled across my wall. Yeah.
Which is also difficult now
that I'm actually away from
my office in my home.
And I don't have that
map to just be able
to glance up and look
at. So yeah, I have
to, I've had it delivered
in may And did, how
does, so that's interesting that
you, you were concerned that
maybe talking about it too
much and we won't would
take away the creative energy,
but the fact that there's
a looming deadline, doesn't take
away the creative energy. I
find I work best with
a deadline. It's also, it
comes from being a freelance
journalist for so long. You
know, you put the most
urgent work at the front
and everything else kind of
falls by the wayside, which
is why it took me
four years to write my
first novel because I was
messing around. I didn't have
a very hard deadline. And
eventually the only, the only
reason I finished my salon,
this is a terrible confession
is that I was going
to get kicked out of
the MFA in creative writing
program. If I didn't, they
basically said to me, look,
you either deliver this book
or you're out. And, and
I did it and I
pulled it out and it
was easy, you know, as
soon as I had a
hard deadline and, and then
I wrote Sioux city in
a year because I, again,
I had a hard deadline,
I got a two book
deal and it was great.
So I like having a
deadline because it makes it
creative work instead of art.
And of course there's art
involved. And I'm not saying
that I'm not trying to
make the best possible book,
but it's that whole factor
of, Oh, the muse is
not with me today. I
just can't do it as
opposed to, Oh God, I've
got a deadline breathing down
my neck with lawyers attached
on the other end. I
better sit down and do
this. And you know, if
it's what I've done every
day, I write every day
as a journalist or as
a TV script writer. And
I've had to meet the
deadlines and it's no different
with a novel In, in
software, we have hard deadlines
and we're, there's the old
software joke where you can
have it. Was it good,
cheap or fast pick two?
It doesn't the same thing
apply in writing. Like, do
you ever, do you ever
read your other stuff? Like
with code, at least I
can refactor it and I
can always mess with it
and tinker, but you ever
go back and like, look
at Moxie Len and go,
Oh, what was I chapter
four? I should have, Oh,
it's too late. So I
published it. There's no revision,
there's no version two. Do
writers do that? Or is
that Just do that? I'd
like, you know, a lot
of writers have big issues
where they don't want to
deliver it all. You know,
they're like, well, it's not
finished and they want to
just keep polishing forever. And
I think that's also a
level of insecurity that it's,
it's very scary to let
something out into the world
and see how people react
to it. And of course
there are things that I
would go back and tweak
now if I could, but
generally I'm, I'm happy with
them. And, and I kind
of, I like to move
on and just move on
to kind of the next
project and tell a whole
different story. I'm also not,
I might consider SQL disease
city, but I'm done with
most land and I just
don't want to go back
there. So that universe is
well, that, that particular, even
the universe, I mean, I
was trying to do something
very specific there, but it's
yeah. I told the story
that I wanted to tell
within that. And I think
I'm always going to jump
genres. I'm always going to
tell a different kind of
story, the novel I want
to write after this is
about dreams. And the one
I want to ride off
to that is about the
real life alcohol crimes unit
in South Africa, Seriously planning that
far ahead. They can know
you have a sense of
where you're heading. It's not,
it's not so much, you
know, like, Oh, I've got
my 10 year life plan
and everything's worked out it's
that these are the stories
that are nagging at me.
I think of stories is
kind of developing in the
doc room in the back
of my head. And it's
only once I actually start
putting it, you know, I've
got kind of the negative,
but it's only when I
start kind of putting it
through the chemical treatment that
I start to really see
what I've got and really
kind of have to work
at it to develop it.
Is, is it a sense
that there's a story in
you, it needs to get
out or is there a
sense that there's a story
out there and you need
to follow it until it
reaches? Its, I think it's
a story that's in me
that needs to get out.
And I always know my
beginnings and I always know
my endings. It's the middle
bits that you have to
fill in. There was a
great analogy and I don't
know whose analogy it was,
but it's awesome. And I've
stolen it, which is that
writing is like taking for
me, writing is like taking
a road trip at night,
you know, where you're leaving
from, you know, your ultimate
destination, maybe, you know, some
of the major way points
along the way, the rest
of the time you're driving
in darkness, you can see
20 feet ahead of you
in the headlights and you've
got to figure it out.
And that's really how I
write. I know, I know
the major plot points. I
know exactly how it's going
to end. And there's a
lot of kind of freewheeling
taking interesting detours books, never
turn out exactly the way
I intended and usually they're
much better for that. And
then I can just recycle
the ideas that I didn't
use. That's a, that seems
like very, very kind of
big picture and very high
level. How do you, do
you agonize over individual phrases
and sentences? Cause Y I
know that when I was
doing creative writing in school
and I was not good
at it, that I would
just look at a sentence
and I would get all
wrapped up in the common
faults in the M dashes
in the sense and just
how did it flow? And
it didn't seem authentic. And
then I would go and
look at other writing that
just is so soluble and
it just kind of the
conversations go back and forth.
And how do you, is
it having an ma and
a fine arts and writing
that, that, that allows you
to kind of get past
the little details of how
to phrase something. I think
it's 10 years of journalism
and writing everyday for a
living. I think the best
thing you can do, if
you want to be a
writer is try and get
a day job where you
can write and hone your
craft. It's like being, it's
that being a pro athlete
or a pianist or a
Coda, you know, you actually
have to do it every
day and just keep honing
and keep practicing. And that,
that's how you get really,
really good. And of course,
so clumsy moments and horrible
sentences and, and, and that's
what editing is for, and
that's what editors are for.
And, and they will deal
with the M dashes and
the fact that I sometimes,
you know, cross into pluperfect
when it's, yeah, I think
what's interesting for me is
that there are certain parts
of the writing that I
have to work at more,
which don't come naturally. Dialogue
comes very naturally to me.
And often my first draft
is very dialogue heavy. And
then I go back and
fill in kind of the
action and the scene descriptions
around that. I think that
also comes from being a
journalist and sitting and listening
to hours and hours and
hours of interview tapes and
transcribing them and really picking
up an ear for how
people speak. It's also being
a script writer, you know,
especially I worked in kids'
cartoons for a very long
time. And in a kid
show, you don't have a
lot. You can't go on
like a five page monologue.
You have to get that
information across in one line
of dialogue, the same with
comics, I'm writing for vertigo.
At the moment, my editor
tells me if I go
two sentences, I'm waffling and
I'm not allowed to do
it. So you have to
make that sentence work so
hard. And it's got to
convey so much about the
character, the subtext of what's
really happening. And so that
stuff is something that I've
been hunting for a long
time that comes very easily
where one of the places
I struggle is action scenes
and I hope they read
well, but those, those are
the things that I have
to work at the hardest.
I really have to sit
and Polish and craft them
and kind of really think
about what's happening. Kind of
play out the cinematography in
my head and sometimes act
it out kind of tumbling
across, not, not quite, but
you know, I will, I
will sit there and make
hand gestures. Cause I'm thinking
about exactly how that punch
was thrown and how they're
kind of falling into the
sewer or whatever it is.
Do you, do you talk
to other people, like I
spoke to another writer named
Barry Eisler, who is a,
like a spy. He was
a CIA agent and like
his dialogue is fine, but
his action is like all
he does. Cause I think
he was in karate or
something. So he might go
three pages over six seconds,
six seconds of action. Cause
that's obviously what his thing
is. And your dialogue and
exposition is your thing. Do
you go and say, well,
this guy knows karate. I
need to find a karate
guy to tell me if
this is how they do
it. I do consult a
lot of experts. I'm not
specifically with the action scenes,
but with zoo city, you
know, I spoke to several
paramedics just to get kind
of the medical information, right.
And I, I try to
get as much kind of
expert knowledge as possible. As
you said, he also deals
with refugees and I interviewed
a young guy from the
Congo. Who'd come, he'd walked
down from the DRC to
Cape town and I really
wanted to get a sense
of kind of his life.
And he checked the slang
and the language for me.
It's very important to me
to have that level of
authenticity. So yeah, I think
it also with action scenes,
it also helps watching a
lot of movies. Yeah. How
do you keep from accidentally
taking someone else's idea? How
plagiarizing? Because aggregation is a
part of life and the
fact that there's so much
information out there now, like,
I mean, Hemingway had his
life and newspapers and the
occasional silent movie, but effectively
he was sitting in a
cafe in Paris writing from
his brain, but now we're
getting bombarded. I mean, you're
bombarded on Twitter for hours
a day before you get
your feet under you. And
that's also, you know, like
reading Boeing, Boeing and Nita
Rama, and you know, all
the websites, that's kind of
my, the start of my
day. So, so you're aggregating,
but how do you make
sure that aggregation doesn't turn
into plagiarism? I think it's
how you use ideas. I
mean, the first thing you
have to realize is that
no idea is original. You
know, when I started writing
zoo city and I'm sure
you've probably noticed this already.
It has quite a lot
in common with Phillip Pullman
and his dark materials trilogy.
I hadn't read that at
the time, but as soon
as I spoke to a
friend of mine, who's kind
of a very good sounding
board for me. He said,
Oh, well it sounds like
Philip Pullman. You just, you
shouldn't do it. And I
was like, really, but I
really liked the idea. And
I went and I read
the golden compass and I
was like, okay, this is
a great book. And it's
not anything similar to what
I'm doing. And that's okay.
So it's also about how
you use the idea. The
same thing happened when I
was writing Moxie land, I
read Margaret Atwood's Erickson, Craig
and I finished the book
and I was like, what
am I doing? Like, she's,
she's just done it better.
There's no ways I could
actually compete with this. And
the fact is that you're,
of course you are competing
any kind of commercial level
and trying to publish and
stuff. But if you can
find a different spin and
a unique take on an
idea, that's really what you
want to do. As far
as research goes, you know,
when I'm transcribing notes, I
try to, you know, I
collate from a lot of
different places and a lot
of different sources. And it's
only if I'm using personal
interviews that I'll kind of
use something directly. And obviously
with that person's permission. But
otherwise, you know, you, you,
it's also being a journalist
and, and you know, specifically,
but having to be so
careful about plagiarizing. Yeah. So
it's really a I'll transcribe
notes in a different way.
You know, as I, as
I'm taking notes on something,
I'll start changing the language
immediately is I'm very, very
careful to try to avoid
doing that In. Let's talk
about zoo city. Cause I'm
in the middle of it.
No, no, no spoilers, but
I think it's fair to
talk about me the first
couple of chapters, that kind
of stuff you would flip
through. If you were looking
at it in a bookstore.
Cause I want people to
buy a zoo city. Cause
I, I bought Zoot Bosu
city and Moxy land while
I was here hanging out
with you in, in zoo
city. There's some, there's some
I, again, I'm not a
writer, so forgiving, but the
feeling there's some literary techniques
that I've heard before. And
this may just be how
like Western writing is where,
you know, where are we?
Where's the context? Are we
in the future? Are we
in the past? Are we
in an apartment? And you
you're, you're teasing us by
giving us just like a
morsel of information per page.
You know, you don't know
if this is a woman
or a man and then
you find out it's a
woman. You don't know what
color they are. You don't
know how old they are.
Is this something that you're
consciously doing? This kind of
dance is this, cause this
seems like this is inherent
to Saifai more than fiction
where you're, you're making me
wonder and I'm slowly having
to paint it together. Did
you do that on purpose
To make readers work? I
think, I think, Oh, I
hope it was enjoyable. No,
it was just like, I
don't know what this person
looks like in my head.
So I just have a
blank face and then I
get hair and then I'll
get shoes and I'm assembling
mind's eyes perspective of this
person. Look, I mean, some
of that is South African
shorthand, you know, South African
would immediately know that Zinzi
was a black woman's name
and that's not necessarily, you
know, that is something that
I have to think about
with international readers that I,
that, you know, I try
to contextualize slang as much
as possible so that you
can gain the meaning, but
the stuff like that, which
I don't even think about
it, I'm just like, Oh,
we'll figure it out. But
it's, I don't know if
it's a specific literary technique.
It's, it's really just that.
I, I like to trust
that my reader is intelligent
and they can keep up.
And, and I, you know,
the one thing I hate
is the info dump. You
know, that scene in the
bar where the one character
slings her arm around the
other character and explains to
them like what's happened in
the world and how it's
changed. And now criminals have
these magical animals that you
can spot them a mile
away. And they're kind of
rounded up into ghettos and
kept segregated from society. That's
really painful. I'd much rather
late, let it kind of
evolve. And again, this is
a cinematic technique. You know,
if you watch something like
children of men, you know,
in the first scene, he
goes into one of my
favorite movies is so he
goes amazing movie. So it
goes into a coffee shop
and there's like a newspaper
headline on the wall. And
I comment, you know, I
think it's about the BA
the kid who's just about
who's just died or whatever
it is. But you know,
movies provide you with those
little contextual clues and they
don't have to tell you
that information. So I'm trying
to do the same in
my fiction, where there are
these contextual clues in the
background and you have to
kind of pick them up,
but then there's also kind
of information and I've woven
through a lot of, kind
of found materials, like an
IMDV page on a documentary,
which kind of explained some
of the phenomenon. I was,
I was trying to make
it as much like our
experience of the real world
as possible, where we don't
just get us source of
information from one source. You
know, we get information from
absolutely everywhere. How did you
decide? Like when like, Oh,
I'm on chapter three, I'm
on chapter four. I think
about now they, the reader
should have figured out what's
going on. So now we
can get into the meat
of it. Like, how do
you decide how, how to
reveal? And then of course,
I'm sure you have big
reveals at the end, but
then also there's, there's always
the need. And I think
it's part of the science
fiction, readers personality for a
satisfying ending. There's like basically
two kinds of cipher readers.
The, you better explain it
to me all at the
end or I'm going to
rage, quit your book, or
the you're going to leave
it wide open. And I'll
never know what I mean.
Like this, this doesn't feel
like there's any middle ground.
You explain it in a
way that works in the
physical world and makes like
self-consistent sense. Or you completely
leave me up in the
end and there's no explanation
for why this world exists.
How do you design that?
I like ambiguity. I think
our experience of the real
world is ambiguous. You know
what happens after we die?
I don't know. You don't
know we've got theories, but
no one knows that stuff.
For sure. So I wanted
to have the same kind
of ambiguity. There are a
lot of theories in the
book and you can develop
your own, but yeah, I'm
afraid like some people might
rage quit, so I'd have
ambiguity in my future. Yeah.
When you make a universe
like this, like we were
talking about, like you felt
with Moxy land, you just
told the story, that universe
is, is over some writers,
like the idea of their
writers universe. Like, you know,
like everything Larry Nivon does
basically in the Nivon universe.
And then sometimes people will
go and just write stuff
in there in that guy's
universe, just cause he's so
amazing. I just want to
be in his space. Have
you thought about like, it
sounds like you want each
book to be itself its
own universe, its own characters,
its own timeline. Yeah. I
mean there are, there are
separate universes. I'm not particularly
interested in going back to
my slam because I told
the whole story that I
wanted to tell them. It's
about a corporate apartheid state
and it's about security theater
and it's about nanotechnology and
advertising kind of mind control
and you know, kind of
a lot of things where
we are really right now.
And I said, all the
things that I wanted to
say about that within, within
the book zoo city is
a much more open universe.
I think Moxie land had
a very kind of specific
intent and purpose and there's
a lot, you know, there
was a scathing satirical edge
there as well zoo city.
I could definitely go back
to the time traveling book.
I, I think I'm going
to be done when it's
done. Why, why could you
go back to zoo city?
Cause I feel like you
kind of, if I may,
you kind of light up
a little bit, like you
have a fondness for that
university, you want to be
in that space. I really,
I really enjoyed the characters
and, and I think I
could go back there and,
and, and there were also,
there were unanswered questions in
Sioux city, not just about
the universe, but about some
of the characters. I still
think the ending is very
satisfying. Although I might be
slightly biased on that account,
but there's definitely a space
to play. And there was
stuff that I wanted to
bring into the book. I
don't know if you've got
to the point where they
talk about the dog fighting.
Not yet. Okay. So basically
in Sioux city for your
listeners, it's a universe where
criminals are saddled with magical
animals. It's kind of a
curse and you can spot
a criminal mile away because
they're walking down the road
with an aardvark or an
EMU or whatever it is.
And one of the shady
businesses, which has kind of
sprung up around this kind
of segregated area of society
and the ghetto is dog
fighting where you have a
boxing match between people, but
their animals also find, and
I did, I really wanted
to have a dog fighting
scene in, in the, in
the novel. And it just,
it would have slowed down
the pace. There was no
space for it. There was
no purpose for it. It
would have been completely gratuitous,
but it's something I was
very, very interested in. And
if I was to do
a sequel, I'd be very
interested in kind of exploring
that scene as well as
kind of the, the CD
kind of sex aspect, human
trafficking, that kind of thing.
I'd be very interested in
getting into that. So you
said that these, these, these
universes are, are on their
own and they're self consistent
between the different, the three
different books, but they all
have a South African style.
They all have a, they
only exist in a universe
where South Africa exists. They exist
in a universe where townships
exists and where corporations exist.
Is that simply because you're
South African or have you
thought about, was it just
natural? Cause as a, as
an American reader reading it
while I do have familiarity
with South Africa, we're on earth.
We're, we're in South Africa, you
know, it's unclear if we're
in a parallel universe or
for 20, 30 years in
the future, that's all unclear,
but there is a lot
of givens. It didn't need
to be on, on earth
in South Africa in a, in
a place where race existed
and things like that. What
do you think about things
like that? You know, I
think the best science fiction
and fiction tells us something
about who we are and
where we are right now,
but specifically who we are.
And as much as I
admire someone like China, Abel,
and his, his most recent
book, embassy town is the
most incredible novel about aliens
and how language works. And
it's, it's all about kind
of metaphor. And it's absolutely
fantastic. I don't know if
I could write that kind
of thing because I'm, I'm
most interested in where we
are right now and saying
something about the state of
where we are right now.
And I feel like I
have to write as close
as possible to where we
are and there might be
some ridiculous conceit, like time
travel or magical animals, but
it's still very much based
on our world and very
close to our world. And
that's for me as a
writer, that's what interests me
most. And I'm very interested
in social issues and I'm
very interested in race and,
you know, to some extent,
all my novels are kind
of apartheid, allegories about segregation
and about artificial divides imposed
between people. But the first
two novels that were South
African, because, you know, that's
what I wanted to write.
And, and you, you write
what, you know, the new
novel is actually said in
Chicago. And that was partly
because I didn't want to
have to deal with politics.
You know, I wanted to
just be able to concentrate
on this high concept all
the time, traveling serial killer
and not make it a
history of apartheid. So it,
it made sense to make
it much more of a
generic kind of American novel.
And it's been amazing getting
into Chicago history. It's been
absolutely fascinating. I've been having
a fantastic time. Has that
been tricky as an African,
trying to write about America
and a clear voice that
is authentic? My publisher likes
it so far, but I
also lived in America for
six months in New York and
then six months in Chicago
back in 2000, 2001, I
drove 10,000 miles across the
USA and Canada and a
67 VW beetle in 1996.
And my brother and I
just broke down every second
town do not, do not
do trans continental in a
67 VW people trust me.
It's like every movie where
someone breaks down and then
they have to like find
like the shadiest guy in
town to fix their car.
Except you did it multiple
cities. Yeah. And we even
broke down in a town
called hope. It was great.
It was yeah, Arkansas. No,
it was a summer in
Canada, near Vancouver, I think.
Yeah, it was, it was
dire, but so I have
lived in the States and,
and I'm going to Chicago
for a reconnaissance mission as
well, just to, you know,
although I lived there, there's
a lot of, kind of,
I'm digging quite deep into
the social history as, so
I really want to go
and visit different locations. I'm
lining up some historians, take
me around. And, and again,
just talking to people When,
when you're writing the book
like that, do you, do
you have a sense that
it could be 300 pages
or 800? All right. Until
the story's done. And then
my editor says, okay, you
need to add 10,000 words
or 20,000 words. I'm like,
Oh really? And then I
go back and flesh it
out. How did they do,
why do they care? A
book has to be a
certain length. Like a book
should be about 80,000 to
a hundred thousand words. I
don't know why it's the
rules. So you write until
you're done. And then they
say add more or there's
too many notes, But you
know what I like with
zoo city, the first draft
I wrote was I think
60,000 words. And then, and
then they came back and
said, listen, you need to
explain more about the world.
It was a very lean
mean draft. So I don't
actually have a problem with
it, you know? And I
like, I love being pushed.
You know, I want my
editor to push me and
make the story as best
as possibly can be. I'm
not, I'm not precious. I'm
not like, Oh no, it's
my precious baby. You can't
touch it. It's like, well,
you can touch it, but
you better make it better.
Yeah. What a district nine,
the movie district nine as
it, I thought the thing
that was great about district
nine is that it, it
said that an extremely compelling
science fiction movie can be
made on a reasonable budget
that has a uniquely South
African tone and be it
commercial success. When that happened.
Did that make you think
that, as you said, he
could be a movie and
do you play that kind
of imaginary thing where you
sells your city and you
make it a movie and
it becomes this amazing thing.
Like district nine, It's been
optioned as a movie and
I'm working on the screenplay
at the moment. What does
that mean option? It means
an it, I assume real
estate's work the same way
in America as they do
in South Africa. It's like when
an estate agent says that
they will sell your house,
but they want exclusivity so
they can put their boards
up outside the house. Does
that make sense? Okay. Okay.
I'll start again because that's
clear. He doesn't know that.
Okay. So you're saying that
some agents, some movie studio
says, I want to make
this movie. I don't know
if I will, but I
want to be here. No,
the movie producer says, I
am going to pay you
a certain amount of money
for exclusivity to try and
sell this movie to raise
the money because yeah, well,
no, to, to raise the
money. So she, she wants
to make it it's produced
called Halina spring. So she
has paid an option. She
has the option automatically renews
every year for three years,
with a set amount of
money each year. It's not
a fortune. And during that,
that gives her three years
to try and raise the
funding. In the meantime I
have, I have set commitments.
I have to write the
script. I have to write
a second draft of the
script. And then she sends
that out to a potential
investors and hopefully raises the
full amount within those three
years to then actually go
forward into reproduction. And I'm
finding production and shooting. This
is all based entirely on
the strength of the script
and then the commercial success
of the book. Or do
you have like, cause I'm
thinking about this again as
a, as a computer person,
cause I'm imagining, well, then
she should be going with
like storyboards and concept art
and a of what sins
he looks like. And then,
okay. I definitely know that
the script has come first.
We've got this amazing South
African concept, art company hero,
concept design. And they did
a lot of work on
the judge Dredd movie. And
they're just waiting for the
script. They're ready to go.
They're very, very excited. And
of course you need all
that. You need to give
people like a real sense
and a feel in the
meantime, she's also going to
be, as soon as she's
got a script, she can
then start sending that out
to directors and then you
want to attach a director
and then, you know, obviously
the director will want to
make it their own project
as well. And they might
require script changes and they
might want to direct the
concept on. So yeah, but
it's a process. I mean,
99% of movies don't happen.
And the 1% that do
take between four and 10
years to happen. So right
now, because you know, you're
talking about millions and millions
of dollars. So yeah. So
right now it's, it's really
fun and I'm really enjoying
it. I'm getting threats screenplay,
and I'm getting to have
a conversation and talking about,
Oh, who would be great
for the casting? I know
it's fantastic. But in the
meantime, you know, I'm not,
I'm not holding it out
for it to be an
absolute definite, it'll be really
amazing and wonderful if it
happens. But in the meantime,
I've got other books to
write and it's really exciting
and fun and I hope
it does happen. Yeah. How
do you deal with, I
thought you had this one
book that you're working on,
but you have a screenplay
and you have the other
word and you're writing for
vertigo comics. How do you
decide what you're going to
work on today? And I
mean, the psychic weight of
this multitasking must be difficult
to me And it's difficult.
It's kind of like, dammit,
why couldn't this stuff have
come up, you know, happened
three years ago. But you
know, I've always had a
day job and written novels
at the same time, you
know, whether I was a
journalist or a script writer
and that's quite tough to
write all day and then
come home at night and
write some more, especially with
three-year-old. But yeah, it's, it's
just management and it's deadlines.
So, you know, vertigo, I
obviously have specific deadlines and
what am I do is,
you know, if I have
a deadline on Friday, I
might work Monday, Tuesday on
my burger comic. And then
Wednesday I work on the
screenplay mornings, Thursday I'll work
on the novel. So it's
just kind of bouncing morning
and afternoon working after hours.
Yeah. What is the vertical
comic that you're working on?
I'm working on an offshoot
of the Willinghams fables. It's
called fairest it's I don't
know how much you know
about the fables universe. It's,
it's a really cool concept.
It's been going for several
years and huge seller. It's
won multiple eyes, no awards.
And it's about fairytale refugees
living in the real world.
So you've got snow wides
and the big, bad Wolf,
and they're all kind of
hiding out in, in New York
city. And I'm, I'm doing
the story of Rapunzel and
it's a six, six issue
arc. And I'm basically going
into territory, which hasn't really
been explored before in, in
Japan, I'm kind of Japanese
fairytales, but it's very contemporary.
There's lots of sex and
violence. And it's, my arc
is very dark. Actually. I'm
working with an artist in
RQ Miranda, and he's just
amazing to work with. And
this is one of the
things I actually love is
collaboration and working in animation
for a long time and
working in the animation studio
where you could kind of
liaise with the animators just
to see what someone else
brings to the process and
how they interpret your words
and turn that into a
drawing and how often that
will be even cooler than
you imagined. And they'll just
add one detailing, like, yes,
why didn't I think of
that? And it's, it's really,
it's really exciting to do
that. That's cool. I I'm,
I'm, I'm kind of the
same way when it comes
to, we call it pairing
in the programming. I mean,
I, you're always greater than
the sum of your parts.
You know what I mean?
Just to, to sit with
another person, you come up
with some more amazing stuff
than if you come up
with it on your own.
Definitely. I mean, other minds
are astonishing actually in zoo
city, three of the chapters
are guest written by other
people. Yeah. And one of
the best chapters as well,
I'm like, damn, I wish
I thought about it there.
The, the, in between the
found materials in between like
the MDB page or visit,
you know, a psychology paper
and all kinds of different
things. That was, that was
something that I added after
I'd done. The first lean
mean draft was I went
back and added all those
things and I was running
up against my deadline and
I spoke to a friend
of mine who is a
music journalist. And I said,
look, I need to do,
I would like to do
a music interview with my
antagonist. Who's a music producer.
And I'd like to kind
of throw that in. Can
I look at some of
your old interviews to kind
of, to see exactly how
you do it and how
you structured and kind of
use that as inspiration. And
he was like, well, why
don't you just let me
interview your character? And I
was like, okay, Evan, you
know, he's not real, right.
He's in my head. He's
like, yeah, let's do it.
So he ended up writing
the interview. So I had
this amazing music journalist this,
you know, this amazing South
African music journalist very well
known, right. Guest write a
chapter. And it worked out
so well that I asked
two of my two, two
people. I know who'd been
involved in the muscle and
short story competition, which my
publisher had run and they
they'd won. And I asked
them to write guest chapters
as well. And they just
wrote the most fantastic, amazing
chapters, which was stuff I
hadn't thought of. And the
one which was a psychology
paper. And I don't think
you've got to that point
yet, but it basically questions
the essence of my entire
world. And I'm like, what
are you doing? But it
was amazing. It was wonderful
because that's exactly what happens
in the real world is
that we do question things
and we do have completely
different theories of the world
and how things work. And
it was so exciting to
have that. And I love
getting fan fiction and I
love seeing fan art. It's
amazing to see other people
playing with your ideas. That
is a great idea. I
love the music interview idea.
That's brilliant. Totally interview you.
Okay. I know it was
amazing. So obviously he wrote
it and then I went
back and tweaked to make
sure that it was completely
coherent with the plot and
then sent it back to
him and yeah. Oh, this
makes me even more excited
to finish the book. So
we're going to put links
up to Sioux city and
Moxie land and a school
as well as your blog
and your Twitter. So people
can get involved in the
Lauren BUCAs world. And I
would very much encourage people
to pick up a zoo
city. I bought it myself.
I bought it on Kindle.
Although I feel like I
should like give you, you
know, Amazon's in between us.
I feel I should just
give you money. Just give
me money, everyone. This PayPal
Lauren money. No, because she'll
get more than if you
buy it from Amazon, but
definitely check those out. And
I thank you so much
for chatting with us today.
Thank you. This has been
another episode of Hansel minutes
and we'll see you again
next week. .